---
date: 2024-04-10T19:30:39+02:00
firstname: "Cedric"
lastname: "Marsboom"
abbrv: "C. Marsboom"
mail: "cmarsboom@avia-gis.com"
past: false
portrait: /images/portraits/cmarsboom.png
position: "PhD student"
ref: "cmarsboom"
title: "Cedric Marsboom"
interests:
  - "modelling of flaviviruses"
  - "wave front invasion modelling"
  - "arboviruses and their vectors"

weight: -10
---

## Biographical sketch

Cedric Marsboom (MSc, Ing) is CTO and head of the R&D department at [Avia-GIS](https://www.avia-gis.com/). Cedric has 10 years’ professional experience as an environmental engineer with a strong background in ecology and specialized in remote sensing, spatial and mathematical modelling of vectors and the diseases they transmit with a focus on machine learning techniques. As the technical director at Avia-GIS he coordinates and conducts projects covering a wide range of needs in the field of vector-borne diseases: (a) development of decision support tools for modelling the spread of vectors and their diseases, (b) development of Internet of Things (IoT) applications to monitor vector presence and dynamics, (c) quality control of vector distribution data generated by international vector networks. Relevant highlights include: the coordination of all Avia-GIS’ research activities with the Pharma industry with a particular reference to global dengue hotspot mapping and the prediction of dengue outbreaks to select areas for clinical trials; the development of the AEDESRISK online SDSS system to support the decision making process for surveillance and vector control of dengue, chikungunya and Zika virus disease in Europe. He also provides scientific support to Avia-GIS software solutions such as VECMAP which is aimed at the spatial modelling of disease vectors and the diseases. He is currently WP leader in a series of EU projects with a strong focus on emerging infectious diseases: e4WARNING, BCOMING, MOBVEC, RESTOREID, and MOOD. Cedric was task leader in the AIM-COST action and currently coordinates VECTORNET3. In 2024, Cedric initiated a PhD project at the SpELL, besides actively taking part to several ongoing projects at the lab.

## Research interests

Cedric’s current research topics are modelling of flaviviruses in endemic areas and introduction modelling towards Europe, wave front invasion modelling of different arboviruses and their vectors and the influence of biodiversity and restoration on disease occurrence.
